Derek Willis  0:03  
Okay, welcome. I'm Derek Willis. I write the newsletter for decision desk HQ. And today I'm really excited to talk to Nathan Gonzalez who is the editor and publisher of Inside elections, and also an election analyst for CQ roll call. And, Nathan, we want to preview essentially, some of the, you know, you'll be doing a live stream for for decision desk coming up about the midterms. And I want to talk a little bit about that. But first, let me just ask you to kind of introduce yourself and also inside elections and what you've been, you know, what you sort of normally do when it comes to studying and preparing for elections?

Nathan Gonzales  0:40  
Yeah. Well, thank you, Derek. I'm excited about the opportunities to work together and excite elections coming up fast. So I'm him. We got to get ready. Inside elections. We bottom line, we provide nonpartisan analysis of races for house Senate governor and president basically boiling it down, we try to identify what are the most competitive races in the country. Look at the candidates, the campaign's a district the partisanship, polling, trying to look at it all and try to figure out who's going to win those races. And who's going to be in the majority. In the next in the next Congress? Inside elections is, is the the latest chapter of what was The Rothenberg Political Report, depending on what you know how old some of your folks are, you know, the Rothenburg report and the cook report have been Washington staples for decades and I I worked with Stu for more than a decade before taking over the newsletter transitioning it from him, renaming it inside elections, I guess I wanted to throw away a 25 year brand. But now it's stew's great. And as we started this next chapter, it made more sense to change it inside elections. And now we have this great opportunity to work with Diddy HQ.

Derek Willis  1:52  
Well, thanks. Yeah, I know, our folks will really appreciate the insight and the, again, the experience that you bring, because you've been doing this, it's not your first rodeo, for sure,

Nathan Gonzales  2:03  
yeah. If people are starting to do the math in their head, you know, I've been doing this for 20 plus years. So my first cycle working with Stu, my first job was at CNN, at a college. And that was we don't have enough time to go through all of that. And it was great. Then I had to transition roles. And it didn't end up being what I wanted to do. But I started with Stu in 2002. So I knew I was old when this is now my third redistricting cycle that I've gone through, it's how you measure things when you're not exactly a normal person. So it's, I appreciate to me, you know, I It's great to see young people involved in the political analysis business, in just the kind of the, the community, I've also seen the advantage of just seeing a few cycles, right that you kind of see the ebbs and flows, if you've seen waves and non waves and, and you just have a context for some of this. And so I'm excited to see as, as some of the younger election community as they get more experienced, it's only going to add to the, to the greater knowledge of this.

Derek Willis  3:08  
So when you used to be like, you know, when I started out roughly a little bit before you and it used to be essentially, like when we talked about live election analysis, we were talking only about election night really, or during the day of Election Day and election night, and then a couple of days after that. But the whole idea of a live stream or talking about like doing live election analysis prior to the election is thankfully pretty new, and we get to experiment with some certain things. Can you take just take us a little bit through what you sort of expect and what the goals are for talking with talking about this midterm election with this upcoming decision desk live stream, I

Nathan Gonzales  3:46  
think the the overall goal is to first provide people they're going to get raised calls from DDA HQ. That's what DD HQ is known for is is making calls being you know, being good and being first and people are going to get that on the live stream. And getting the the analysis from the inside elections team and some, some friends and some friends of ours that we're going to you it's giving people have an opportunity to go behind the scenes about what what do reporters talk about on election night. It's not going to it doesn't it's not going to look like what you'll see on cable news. There's not going to be a giant desk with 14 people sitting around it. It's going to look like a living room. And we're going to be sitting around a coffee table talking to each other about what's going on watch as the night unfolds and as racist start to get called What does that mean? And when I do do more traditional TV, and when people watch you often hear the reporters say, well, at the during the break, I was talking with my colleague about this or in the green room. We were talking about this. We kind of stripped that away and like you get to hear that conversation. That's going on between reporters and between analysts, and people who have been covering these races for the entire two years. And so that's, that's why I'm excited to have that combination of the new Zenus of race calls with the analysis in real time and giving people an idea of what's going on, there is a risk to this Derrick, there is a risk, because if this knight doesn't go as, as we project, it will, people will get to watch in real time, what does that look like when when races that we think are have been leaning or tilting or likely one way and they're going another way, we're going to be processing that in real time. And when I say casual, it's going to be casual. You might see me drink some Mountain Dew, there might be snacks on the table, you it's going to be different. And that's why just I'm excited. And people can watch. You can watch CNN or Fox or MSNBC, and you can have this on your laptop on the DD HQ YouTube channel. They don't you can do both at the same time, right? And you can because this is the this is the Super Bowl for so many people. And that you want to get as much information as possible, and we're going to provide something different.

Derek Willis  6:21  
Right? And that even even though there will be uncertain surprises on election night, there always are surprises and things you don't expect. The fact is that you and your your team that you've been kind of you've been studying these races for months or years in some cases. And so yeah, the surprises that are going to come. But I imagine like What the You know what, what viewers will who tune in will see is essentially a reaction from you and from others that is based on the reporting and research that you've done on these races on how this could have had this outcome that maybe we didn't expect could have actually happened and what that and more maybe more importantly, what that means for other races that haven't been called yet.

Nathan Gonzales  7:02  
Right. And, you know, obviously, we'll we'll be looking at the East Coast first with those first poll closing times. Hopefully votes are counted in a quick and efficient manner. And so we'll start to get a sense, you know, if we know, results from Pennsylvania early, either the Senate which might take a little bit longer those key House races in Pennsylvania or Virginia, a couple in North Carolina, yeah, there's some that are dotted along that along the in the eastern time zone that, again, as long as we have votes being counted, it could give us an idea of what the rest of the country holds. This is an election night event, we should also be transitioning our minds, though to election week, in terms of when we start to know the full results, it's going to take time, California appears to take two or three, two or three weeks to count races or to count votes. And we've got more than we got a half dozen competitive races in California that we're watching. So it's gonna extend beyond even this this live stream.

Derek Willis  8:04  
All right. So I wanted to get into sort of a broad kind of, to the extent that we have one, you have one a broad theory of of this election, and we've seen like, a lot of discussion about and speculation about okay, well, it's, you know, it was the Dobbs ruling as the as a big factor or it was, you know, obviously its inflation and its gas prices, but then gas prices went down. But now they go back up. And so I'm wondering like, if you could set the table for like going into like as voters like early voting is already occurring, lots of places but going leading up into election, election day and election night, like, is there a coherent theory that you have about this midterm? And how confident are you in it?

Nathan Gonzales  8:48  
is easy, right? This is a we have starter. For much of the cycle. This looked to be a traditional midterm election. midterm elections are typically referendums on the president. We had an unpopular president ever since our exit from Afghanistan in and it looked like Republicans were set up well, to win back both the House and the Senate. We have to remember they don't need a wave to win back the house in the Senate because the margins are so close, but it looked like Republicans were going to do very well. The dogs decision changed the dynamic a little bit. I think it boosted democratic enthusiasm that diminished. I think that pulled the ceiling down on Republican gains because as long as Democratic voters come out, they're going to vote mostly for Democratic candidates. That decreases the number of crossover voters or persuadable voters that Republicans have. But here in the last few weeks, Republicans there has been a shift back toward Republicans and the undecided voters that are prioritizing the economy. They don't think President Biden is doing it particularly good job could break disproportionately toward Republican candidates or against Democratic candidates. But that recovery from the late summer democratic momentum has been uneven. We're seeing Democrat Republicans do better in places such as New York, in Oregon, and parts of California. But there are places where Democrats have have held their own Michigan, for example. So it's it's been that recovery has been uneven. I don't think we've veered all the way back to a traditional midterm and talking about waves. But Republicans are in a better position than they were two months ago.

Derek Willis  10:45  
Gotcha. I want to start with the house, mostly because it's my favorite set of races to talk about. But we'll get to some other ones in a minute. But I wanted to start essentially, with the I mean, part of what you do and when you study a race as you Yeah, you look at the candidates, you look at fundraising, you look at sort of popular opinion. And we haven't had, like nearly as many in house polls, publicly released house polls, for folks for election analysts, like how do you make up that gap? Are there ways to do it? Like ways to do it that that that you have found to be like, somewhat reliable, or is it that doesn't make your job harder?

Nathan Gonzales  11:26  
We'll always want to see as much data as possible. There's certainly less public polls than in the past. But there is a boatload of private polls. in how we add inside elections, we want to see it all I want to see the public data, the private data, the partisan data, the nonpartisan data. When I'm not doing interviews, or media hits, or webinars we are begging for for data. And to some people. There's a difference of opinion about partisan polling. I know that some election analysts just dismiss it out of hand is biased. I have a very different view. And this comes from my you know, stew and in working with him in the past, I think there is a how do I put there is value in partisan polling because partisan pollsters have a vested interest in having good data, right? They need good polling, good data to make millions of dollars worth of strategic decisions, what races are they going to invest in? What is going to be in their ads in so I like that they have skin in the game, that doesn't mean that their numbers are perfect or never are never wrong. But I don't just we don't dismiss them. We try to get them. Most of them we can't print in our in our newsletter or publications because they're off the record. But we they can inform and they do inform our ratings, and then our overall overall projection. So I tried, but I tried humbly, and I tread carefully, because polling is going still going through a crisis, there is concern that it is under estimating Republican support. But I would rather do this in a quantitative way rather than relying on retweets and a couple of anecdotes about rallies in crowd size. Yeah. I, I would rather do it this way. Embracing the uncertainty embracing the imprecision of polling versus the the alternatives.

Derek Willis  13:34  
Is there a is there a state or with some House races or a particular house race? We were like, Man, I could really use some more poll. Like if I said, just one race, where you'd be like I could really use some more polling in that race. To help me kind of understand what's going on there. Is there one that comes to mind?

Nathan Gonzales  13:51  
Well, the first thing comes to mind is I want to see more polling everywhere. The desire a mentally now trying to go through our, our Google Doc and think about where we where we're sort of missing. I would like to see more in a couple of California races, California 47, where Katey Porter is running against Scott BA. You know, it's I think it's been on the competitive list for a while and everyone's been thinking about it, but I feel like there isn't there hasn't been as much data there compared to some of the pure toss ups like a Minnesota to or, you know, Virginia to or something like that. Also California's 49th district where Congressman Mike Levin is running for reelection. Brian Marriott is the Republican that's been on the outskirts of the battlefield, but he's been gaining more buzz and I would want to see more. With I want to see more there with the caveat I want to see more everywhere. Everywhere, right? Derek? I should. I should point out though, that we're about to enter a Have a polling deadzone of sorts, meaning that there comes a point at the end of the cycle where, where candidates and campaigns stop polling, because they have already made their strategic decisions, it's too late, it gets to a point where it's too late to make changes in your campaign strategy. And then in you're just in so you're, you're kind of wasting money. I don't think it's a waste of money, because I want to see it. But I'm not the most important thing to these person to these campaigns. And so I know for a fact that there are some campaigns that have just decided to forego their final polls and just say, we're putting this money on TV, like we have to reach voters, we know what we need to do, we got to reach voters, and that's, so we're kind of flying blind at the end, which can be a difficult thing, because some of the races break late, or we don't know exactly what undecided voters are going to do. So that adds a level of uncertainty to the projection process.

Derek Willis  15:58  
Gotcha. So you had talked earlier about the the unevenness, relatively speaking of some in some states, and in some races about like, sort of the Republican gains or the recent Republican gains or shifts toward the Republicans and about how that wasn't universally, universally true. And I was curious if like, you know, if that's particularly to me, it's like, I think that kind of shows up in Senate races, you know, in some Senate races, and maybe not and others were, you know, kind of contrasting like races in Arizona or in. You know, in Pennsylvania, you can definitely see from polling a gap that has been closing. But like, it seems like not all these races are the same for lots of different reasons. Are there a couple like themes that are that emerged in your mind about like, why that's the case about why that unevenness exists?

Nathan Gonzales  16:58  
Well, one of the main themes of this election could be the dissonance between the House and the Senate, that Republicans are set up to maybe gain a couple dozen or more house seats, but yet squeaked by with a majority in the Senate. And part of that is candidate quality, that in the in the Senate Republicans have made this more difficult than what it needed to be. I would argue that if they're nominees in Ohio, and Pennsylvania, and Arizona, maybe North Carolina and Georgia, to a lesser extent had run better general election campaigns, they would be in strong a stronger position in the individual races and to win back the Senate. In that dynamic, the candidate issue the dynamic does exist on the House side, but it's a little bit different. Where we're seeing Democrats Democrats struggle is in open seats, where there aren't incumbents who have a pre established brand, or connection to their district. Where we've seen Democrats so far have been holding up and maybe holding back the wave is the strength of their incumbents talking about a Jared golden in Maine to or Cerise David's in Kansas, even Elissa Slotkin in Michigan, Kildee in Michigan who are coming into this homestretch in a fairly strong position. But they're they're incumbents, right? They have their machines and operations in place. But these open seat, open seat, open seat races, inexpensive places to advertise, such as some of those New York districts. That is a combination that combination is making, making it difficult for Democrats in the House.

Derek Willis  18:47  
Gotcha. I want to also like I want to talk about Oregon because like Oregon fascinates me this cycle, because for a couple of reasons, right one, they have competitive House races, including some of these open seats, for different reasons, one retirement one, you know, a defeat of an incumbent and a primary. And then you have this three wave governor's race. And normally, I think like, you know, I'd love to hear your your thoughts on this like normally a governor's election like a lot of times they are there. There are fundamental differences between that and like a Senate election, a different statewide election. There's a different factors going on there. I wonder like in Oregon, like what, what the interplay, what you see is the interplay between what's going on in the governor's race and in those house in especially those two two House races that that make it that have created this environment where like you could you could see essentially a, you know, Oregon come out of this with the Donald a Republican governor, but with to at least two Republican members of the House, which I haven't had in a long time.

Nathan Gonzales  19:46  
Yeah, it could get up to four. I mean, I love Oregon, I actually have a bias toward Oregon. I grew up there. My parents and my sister and her husband now live are still live but what is now the new six districts so they live in It was Kurt that part of Kurt Schrader's district, west of west of I five in the Willamette Valley. Oregon is a great example of the crime issue dominating, dominating the landscape. The crime and homelessness in Portland is is giving Republicans an opportunity up and down the ballot. Christine Drazen on the Republican side is in the governor's race is being helped by Betsey Johnson, the independent the former Democratic State Senator now independent who's running in the Democrat State House Speaker, Tina Kotek. Drazen has an opportunity, in part because she doesn't have to get to 50%. That if if a Republican in Oregon has to get to 50, that's probably not going to happen if she can win with 40. That's doable. I mean, Trump got 40 in Oregon, so it's this is not right. This is not outrageous. And Oregon hasn't elected a Republican for governor in more than 40 years. The last Republican governor isn't even alive anymore. That's how long that's how long it's been. So that in that energy, I think at the top of the ticket is also helping Republicans in the fourth district, fifth district in sixth district all open partially because of retired weld to Fazio retiring and for the 60s new and Kurt Schrader, losing the primary in the fifth district. It's sort of a perfect storm for Republicans to do well. So they're already going to win that Eastern Oregon district. So they could come out with for House seats on a great night for for the Republican Party, which is almost unthinkable. But in that that would be that would certainly put Republicans in the majority overall. But that also doesn't mean the Republicans are going to sweep every you know that that dynamic is happening everywhere. We're seeing crime as an issue, but it's a particularly relevant in Oregon because of Portland's the problems there and the outsized, immediate thumbprint that Portland has across the state. You know, there. There are people in Oregon that live hours from Portland. I mean, the fourth district is solid few hours for boiling. Brian, people are very concerned about the you know, the the problems that are happening in the in the city.

Derek Willis  22:19  
Yeah. I mean, it's just fascinating to me, and it'll be one of the places I mean, unfortunately, it'll be late in the night on election night for Oregon. But so let's shift back quickly over to the east coast and talk about you mentioned some of those New York race House races, which again, like they have a governor's race there that wasn't thought to be super competitive. It probably isn't, like, competitive in the same way that some other governor's races are. Other statewide races are. But the the there's a lot there was a lot of talk about the D Triple C chair, Sean Patrick Maloney being in trouble in his district, and that's one never a good sign for a Democratic Party leader, leadership position. But what what do you think is like, what are the factors going into that sort of New York vote in that New York electorate? That and what kind of signals do you think a Republican success in those slightly upstate areas portends on election night?

Nathan Gonzales  23:16  
Yeah, I think New York, there is also sort of a crime inner city thread that's, that's running through those races. Long Island is of particular interest. And we saw some gains at the local level. There over the past couple of years of gains, what on the on the Republican side, and now filtering, filtering up to the congressional races? And you also have a number of open seats. Right. You don't have incumbents. I mean, Maloney. Maloney, obviously, being incumbent in a in a different part of the state, that race has been, has been that's a hard, hard to get a read on, because the D, Triple C has been very careful with not making it seem like the chairman is getting a disproportionate amount of resources for his for his reelection race. I in and I understand that I also realized that it's still a seat, right? It's still almost no practice for them not to do whatever they need to in order to hold that seat because they need to hold as many as they can. But it's been this dance, kind of a public dance with what they're doing privately that has made things complicated. But New York, New York, I'm trying to I should know this off the top of my head exactly how many I think there are half a dozen New York races, at least on our somewhere on our competitive chart. And it's been slowly creeping those into more competitive categories because that's what the data that's what the data have shown. Republicans no need to win them all. But it's it's indicative of a where the party is on the march in some Biden areas, in some Biden areas, and they don't need to win everything, but they would love to get as many as they can. Yeah. Is there a if

Derek Willis  25:16  
the lectionary goes well, for the GOP as looks like probably going to go seems like probably going to go pretty well, at least in some respects. Are there? Are there risks? Or district especially in the house? Like Are there risks for like, where they kind of essentially extend a little bit further, you see this often happen to like it, you know, you grow majority and you have seats that are immediately become hard to defend? Or there are they're kind of classic examples of seats where like, Republicans might win that in 2022, but like, have a really hard time defending it in a presidential year. Or with with Trump on the ballot, for example?

Nathan Gonzales  25:56  
Yeah, I mean, we'll and we'll see how many how far how deep they go into democratic territory when, I mean, some of these Oregon districts might be difficult to hold. I mean, these are districts that Biden won by eight to 1011 points, depending on what district we're talking about. So in a more normal environment, or in a pro democratic environment, those could come. Those could come back to Democrats or be difficult for Republicans to hold. I mean, both the both the sixth district and the fifth district include Portland suburbs, that have not been friendly to the Republican Party, but under the circumstances are certainly showing a willingness to make a change. You know, fourth district has college town, you have oh, and Oregon State, places that in a in a that even though that part of Oregon tends to be red, they're sort of islands, islands of blue. So those could be districts that would be hard to hold in a different environment.

Derek Willis  26:53  
Okay. And then I think finally, I want to ask you are there you know, when you study a lot of elections, you get your sort of favorite races that maybe other people aren't? Don't, don't don't give a lot of love or attention to? Or do you have like a favorite like maybe a governor's race or a other statewide or maybe, you know, maybe even a House race that you're like, I really liked this race, and I don't think it gets enough attention or enough the respect it deserves. Is there something like that out there for you that you'll be looking at looking for on election night?

Nathan Gonzales  27:22  
It's like asking me to choose between my children.

Derek Willis  27:24  
I know, I know. It's not

Nathan Gonzales  27:27  
there, I love them in their own unique way. I'm gonna sound like a broken, I was like a broken record. But Oregon six there, I mean, I'll walk you through my process a little bit in that. Mike Erickson emerged as the as the Republican nominee. And I met Mike Erickson more than a decade ago, when he ran for Congress and what was the fifth district against Darlene Hooli. And he was he had a lot of the same baggage that he has now he had back then including the public story about him dropping off a I don't know if he calls her his girlfriend, but dropping dropping by an ATM with a woman to take out money and then dropping her off, happened drop her off outside a clinic, an abortion clinic. He says he doesn't know what happened. But this stuff this stuff was on the table when he lost a couple of House races 10 years ago. So in my mind, I'm fast forwarding to 2022 and think, Okay, this guy lost with these with this baggage in this array, and now he's running in a Biden 55 district 54 district. How is this how is he going to win? And right? We I started to skeptical I admit, but we have progressively go where the data lead and have moved are changed our rating and now it's all the way in tossup and so it is that race maybe it's the West Coast bias or the East Coast bias of not getting as much attention this was sort of a Herschel Walker we were talking about these issues with in Oregon six before the stuff on Herschel Walker even even popped up but that that's a good pick it's near and dear to my heart because it's it's still where you know it's not home I I'm a dc dc resident now but that's my roots are still back there.

Derek Willis  29:25  
Now it's a good pick. And I actually lied I want to have one more thing and I like I'm trying to put my head here a like I said like the my sort of priors here are a pretty good night for for Republicans on election night. Can you imagine an election night in which that happens where where Republicans have a good night a secure a house majority and and someone like Sharif's David's manages to eke out a victory in Kansas three. Like is that a pilot plausible thing? And if so, like how does that happen?

Nathan Gonzales  29:56  
Yeah, I think I think Republicans could have a good a great night in Bruce David's can win or Jared golden could win. And that happens because I think of the strength of the incumbent. And you know, that they ran, they are running good campaigns that clearly have a stronger a strong connection to their district in so I can I can see it now they may end up losing because maybe voters decide, hey, I I liked the congresswoman or I like the congressman. But this is about something bigger. This is about change. We the status quo is not acceptable. And we're we just need we need more Republicans in Washington to put the brakes on President Biden, if that's the mentality, then I can see them losing. But I at this stage, getting close to the election, I think golden and David's are narrow favorites to win reelection. But yet I see Republicans winning the house.

Derek Willis  30:55  
Alright, well, we have to you know, elections are complicated. We have to keep all those things in our head at the same time, I guess. Well, well, I'll be tuning in on election night to see what what would thoughts emerge from the couch. And that's the key from the Mountain View, right, mountain Mountain Dew powered observations. So Nathan, thanks a lot. I appreciate appreciate your time and we look forward to you and the DD HQ team kind of you know, having a little joint joint party on election night to to help help shed some light on what's when those results come in, how we how we process them, how we understand what they mean what they mean for the future. Next, next Congress. So thanks, thanks a lot for your time,

Nathan Gonzales  31:35  
no problem and we'll see you on the other side. Sounds good.

